---
layout: post
title: The Epic of Alexander (Ultimate) thoughts
date: 2023-12-17 15:43 +0900
categories: [FFXIV]
tags: [Ultimate]
---

## TEA

The Epic of Alexander (Ultimate), herein abbreviated as TEA, is the Ultimate fight in the Shadowbringers expansion, released in patch 5.11 in late October 2019, and based on the Alexander raid series in Heavensward. In TEA you must defeat a gauntlet of bosses successively from Living Liquid (and Liquid Hand), Cruise Chaser, Brute Justice, Alexander Prime, and culminating in Perfect Alexander. The key hidden mechanic of TEA is the Enigma Codex, which you acquire after resolving a mechanic in a specific way to prove you are pure of heart, granting you the power to manipulate time. You then utilize this effect to see a future where you attempt (and fail) to survive a series of otherwise unpredictable attacks and learn from it, changing the future and correctly executing the mechanic.

## Ultimates

Ultimates in FFXIV are the highest difficulty content. Whereas Savage fights are typically less than 10 minutes, offer a degree of tutorialization through showing mechanic A then mechanic B then mechanic A + B, and over time can be completed more and more easily due to gear becoming stronger, Ultimates are a sort of evergreen, extreme challenge. For one, Ultimates are typically at least 16 minutes, which is an immensely long time to have to keep focus as one mistake can send everyone back a dozen minutes. There's also a stronger emphasis on puzzle aspects, both in terms of mechanics that are specifically designed to make you sit down with a whiteboard and figure out what to do as well as often just throwing things at you without any lower stakes context. This is part of what makes some Ultimates harder than others, as encountering a highly challenging segment with many variations, specific timings, and instant failure states upon any mistake 10 minutes in makes it exhausting to even try again. On a technical note, while most content in FFXIV can be "unsynced" so you can do it at any level and with any gear, allowing you to solo old content intended for 8 players, Ultimates specifically lock you to the highest level and gear strength that was available when it was released.

An Ultimate is conceptually a raid series or storyline from the past reworked and stuck together into one contiguous battle. One could be cynical and say it's just rehashed old content, but aside from the difficulty part of what draws attention to Ultimates is how they are a reimagining, both of the fight mechanics themselves and of the stories.

One last distinguishing factor is that since Ultimates are a string of several bosses in a row they're said to be composed of multiple phases, each with completely different mechanics. At the same time, player state is carried over between phases, meaning that sometimes it's beneficial to not immediately defeat a boss so that players can continue to recover or build resources. Inversely, if someone dies then you might need to adjust as they'll be missing some power that was expected to be stockpiled, which can in severe cases snowball for the rest of the run.

## Alexander

Spoilers for the Alexander raid series!

The Final Fantasy series likes to reuse names, concept, and sometimes characters from previous entries, and FFXIV especially does many homages while usually skillfully crafting the background and details to fit the world. This time is no exception; Alexander, a giant robot fortress, is a common summon throughout the series, known for using the holy damage ability Judgment/Divine Judgment (hold onto that for a bit). In FFXIV, it was designed to be an all-powerful fortress for researchers to study the world. It was summoned through the use of the Enigma Codex, a book containing the instructions for creating and using Alexander (as well as supposedly basically all knowledge in existance?), but a key requirement to use it is to be pure of heart. This plays an important role in the original story: one user, Mide, a member of the group who summoned Alexander, is disheartened when an accident kills everyone else involved in the summoning. Quickthinx, the leader of the Goblin group called the Illuminati who plotted to use Alexander to create a perfect timeline, can read it but avoids using it, and upon trying to for the first time is immediately rejected by Alexander and destroyed. You can read more about Alexander at [the wiki here](https://finalfantasy.fandom.com/wiki/Alexander_(Final_Fantasy_XIV)#History).

In short, Alexander is a huge robot ark that can control time and is associated with divine judgment. In both the raid series and TEA you technically fight a smaller version, Alexander Prime, inside of the real Alexander itself -- sadly they did not let us fight a building in this Final Fantasy game (yet) (Phantom Train doesn't count because it's not a building).

## Living Liquid

Living Liquid was originally the boss in Alexander - The Arm of the Father, the third fight in the first tier. It is accompanied by the Liquid Hand and creates water puddles that act as field hazards as well as performing their own attacks. It's apparently based on the Liquid Flame from FFV, which also had human, hand, and tornado forms.

There are a number of mechanics that are used in this phase with a few different variations and timings, so first let's look at these building blocks.

### Cascade

A mostly straightforward but hard-hitting raid-wide attack used by Living Liquid. This also summons three fixed water puddles in a triangle pattern, but the orientation of the puddles is random. Since certain attacks will later come from the puddles, we treat the tip of the triangle as the new north for positioning. The first Cascade also generates the Liquid Hand, which has its own separate health pool taken from half of the Living Liquid's remaining health.

### Protean Wave

A narrow cone AoE aimed at the closest player, used by both Living Liquid and the water puddles. It leaves a Water Resistance Down debuff for a short duration on players it hits, meaning you cannot be hit by multiple at once or in quick succession. Protean Waves are sometimes telegraphed in advance so that players can dodge before they actually come out and other times are unavoidable (but are still aimed by proximity and thus can be baited in certain directions).

### Fluid Swing

A small conal AoE tankbuster used by both Living Liquid and Liquid Hand with no telegraph. In addition to only being survivable by tanks, this also leaves a short Water Resistance Down debuff and often is used by both bosses at once, so tanks need to position themselves so neither the other tank nor the rest of the party are hit.
